क्रमेण सर्गे परिवर्धमाने
कदापि दिव्या: सनकादयस्ते ।
भवद्विलोकाय विकुण्ठलोकं
प्रपेदिरे मारुतमन्दिरेश ॥१॥
क्रमेण सर्गे	gradually,as creation
परिवर्धमाने	was progressing
कदापि	once
दिव्या: सनकादय: ते	those divine (sages) Sanaka and others
भवत्-विलोकाय	to see Thee
विकुण्ठलोकं प्रपेदिरे	reached Vaikunthloka
मारुतमन्दिरेश	O Lord of Guruvaayur
O Lord of Guruvaayur! as creation progressed, the divine sages Sanaka and the others wanting to pay their respects to Thee went to Vaikuntha loka.
मनोज्ञनैश्रेयसकाननाद्यै-
रनेकवापीमणिमन्दिरैश्च ।
अनोपमं तं भवतो निकेतं
मुनीश्वरा: प्रापुरतीतकक्ष्या: ॥२॥
मनोज्ञ-	the enchanting
नैश्रेयस-कानन-आद्यै: -	Naishreyasha Kaanana (the garden by that name) and other
अनेक-वापी	with many lakes
मणिमन्दिरै: - च	and gems studded mansions
अनोपमं तं	that incomparable
भवत: निकेतं	Thy abode
मुनीश्वरा: प्रापु: -	the sages reached
अतीत-कक्ष्या:	having crossed the (six) ramparts
Crossing the six ramparts, the sages reached Thy unmatched abode with the Naishreyasha garden, many lakes and many mansions studded with gems.
भवद्दिद्दृक्षून्भवनं विविक्षून्
द्वा:स्थौ जयस्तान् विजयोऽप्यरुन्धाम् ।
तेषां च चित्ते पदमाप कोप:
सर्वं भवत्प्रेरणयैव भूमन् ॥३॥
भवत्-दिद्दृक्षून्-	desirous of seeing Thee
भवनं विविक्षून्	and about to enter (Thy) abode
द्वा:स्थौ	two gatekeepers
जय: - तान्	Jaya, them (the sages)
विजय: -अपि-अरुन्धाम्	also Vijaya, stopped
तेषां च चित्ते	and in their (sages') minds
पदम्-आप कोप:	entered anger
सर्वं भवत्-प्रेरणया-एव	all this by Thy prompting alone
भूमन्	O Infinite One!
The sages were about to enter Thy abode to see Thee, when two gatekeepers, Jaya and Vijaya stopped them. This made the sages angry. All this happened by Thy prompting only.
वैकुण्ठलोकानुचितप्रचेष्टौ
कष्टौ युवां दैत्यगतिं भजेतम् ।
इति प्रशप्तौ भवदाश्रयौ तौ
हरिस्मृतिर्नोऽस्त्विति नेमतुस्तान् ॥४॥
वैकुण्ठलोक-अनुचित-प्रचेष्टौ	for Vaikunthloka, is not fit, whose conduct
कष्टौ युवां	wicked ones you two
दैत्य-गतिं भजेतम्	state of Asuraas will attain
इति प्रशप्तौ	thus cursed
भवत्-आश्रयौ तौ	Thy servants they
हरि: -स्मृति: -न: -अस्तु-	may we remember Hari (God)
इति नेमतु:-तान्	thus beseeching prostrated before them
The two gatekeepers were cursed by the sages that as their conduct was not befitting for them to be in Vaikunthloka, they may be embodied as Asuraas. Jaya and Vijaya, Thy servants, beseeched the sages that their devotion to Thee may not falter. So saying, they prostrated to the sages.
तदेतदाज्ञाय भवानवाप्त:
सहैव लक्ष्म्या बहिरम्बुजाक्ष ।
खगेश्वरांसार्पितचारुबाहु-
रानन्दयंस्तानभिराममूर्त्या ॥५॥
तत्-एतत्-आज्ञाय	that this knowing
भवान्-अवाप्त:	Thou coming (out)
सह-एव लक्ष्म्या	along with Laxmi
बहि: -अम्बुजाक्ष	out, O Lotus eyed Lord!
खगेश्वर-अंस-	on Garuda's shoulder
अर्पित-चारु-बाहु: -	placing Thy charming arm
आनन्दयन्-तान्-	delighting them (the sages)
अभिराम-मूर्त्या	by Thy beautiful form
O Lotus-eyed Lord! Knowing all what had happened, Thou came out along with Laxmi, with Thy charming arm resting on Garuda. The sages were delighted to see Thy beautiful form.
प्रसाद्य गीर्भि: स्तुवतो मुनीन्द्रा-
ननन्यनाथावथ पार्षदौ तौ ।
संरम्भयोगेन भवैस्त्रिभिर्मा-
मुपेतमित्यात्तकृपं न्यगादी: ॥६॥
प्रसाद्य गीर्भि:	with pleasing words
स्तुवत: मुनीन्द्रान्-	to the sages as they were praising Thee,
अनन्य-नाथौ-	who did not have any other refuge (other than Thee)
अथ पार्षदौ तौ	to those two attendants
संरम्भयोगेन भवै:-त्रिभि:-	by the path of confrontation, in three lives
माम्-उपेतम्-	attain me
इति-आत्त-कृपम्	thus overcome by compassion
न्यगादी:	Thou said
As the sages were praising Thee with pleasing words, Thou told the two attendants, who had no refuge but Thee, to confront three lives as Asuras on earth. Overcome by compassion, then Thou granted them Thy attainment.
त्वदीयभृत्यावथ काश्यपात्तौ
सुरारिवीरावुदितौ दितौ द्वौ ।
सन्ध्यासमुत्पादनकष्टचेष्टौ
यमौ च लोकस्य यमाविवान्यौ ॥७॥
त्वदीय-भृत्यौ-	Thy two attendants
अथ काश्यपात्-तौ	then from sage Kashyapa, they both
सुरारि-वीरौ-	as the gods' powerful enemies
उदितौ दितौ द्वौ	were born of Diti the two
सन्ध्या-समुत्पादन-	being begotten at evening
कष्ट-चेष्टौ	having cruel nature
यमौ च	and the twins (became)
लोकस्य यमौ-इव-अन्यौ	for the worlds, like other two Yamas (the death god)
Thereafter,Thy two attendants took birth as great Asuras through Diti and her husband sage Kashyapa. They being begotten in the evening twilight, the twins became cruel in nature as if they were the gods of death for the world.
हिरण्यपूर्व: कशिपु: किलैक:
परो हिरण्याक्ष इति प्रतीत: ।
उभौ भवन्नाथमशेषलोकं
रुषा न्यरुन्धां निजवासनान्धौ ॥८॥
हिरण्य-पूर्व: कशिपु: किल-एक:	(the name) Hiranya preceding Kashipu, i.e. Hiranyakashipu was one
पर: हिरण्याक्ष इति प्रतीत:	the other Hiranyaaksha thus was known
उभौ	both
भवत्-नाथम्-अशेष-लोकं	the whole world which has Thee as the master
रुषा	in anger
न्यरुन्धां	(they) tormented
निज-वासना-अन्धौ	by their own vaasanaas being blinded
One son was known by the name of Hiranyakashipu and the other was known as Hiranyaaksha.They tormented the whole world, which has Thee as the master, in anger and blinded by their inherent evil tendencies.
तयोर्हिरण्याक्षमहासुरेन्द्रो
रणाय धावन्ननवाप्तवैरी ।
भवत्प्रियां क्ष्मां सलिले निमज्य
चचार गर्वाद्विनदन् गदावान् ॥९॥
तयो: -	of them
हिरण्याक्ष-महासुरेन्द्र:	Hiranyaaksha the great Asura
रणाय धावन्-	a fight seeking
अनवाप्त-वैरी	not getting any opponent
भवत्-प्रियां क्ष्मां	Thy dear earth
सलिले निमज्य	immersing in water
चचार गर्वात्-विनदन्	roamed about, roaring in arrogance
गदावान्	carrying a mace
Of the two of them, Hiranyaaksha, the great Asura, seeking a fight and not getting an opponent, immersed Thy dear earth into the water. He then roamed about roaring arrogantly, carrying a mace.
ततो जलेशात् सदृशं भवन्तं
निशम्य बभ्राम गवेषयंस्त्वाम् ।
भक्तैकदृश्य: स कृपानिधे त्वं
निरुन्धि रोगान् मरुदालयेश ॥१०।
तत:	then
जलेशात्	from the Lord of Waters (Varuna)
सदृशं भवन्तं	as his equal Thee (are)
निशम्य	hearing (thus)
बभ्राम	(he) roamed about
गवेषयन् त्वाम्	searching for Thee
भक्तैक-दृश्य:	(O Thou) who can be seen only by Thy devotees
स कृपानिधे त्वं	That Abode of Compassion,Thou
निरुन्धि रोगान्	eradicate my ailments
मरुदालयेश	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Then coming to know from the god of the waters, Varuna, that Thou are the only match for him, Hiranyaaksha roamed about searching for Thee. O Thou, who can be attained only by Thy devotees, Thou the abode of Compassion, kindly eradicate my ailments, O Lord of Guruvaayur!.